CHAPTER 7
45[ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE] CERTIFICATES 35 S. 35. Certifying Authority to issue 46[Electronic Signature] Certificate.—(1)
Any person may make an application to the Certifying Authority for the issue of a
47[Electronic Signature] Certificate in such form as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
(2) Every such application shall be accompanied by such fee not exceeding twenty- five thousand rupees as may be prescribed by the Central Government, to be paid to the
Certifying Authority:
Provided that while prescribing fees under sub-section (2) different fees may be pre- scribed for different classes of applicants.
(3) Every such application shall be accompanied by a certification practice statement or
where there is no such statement, a statement containing such particulars, as may be specified
by regulations.
(4) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the Certifying Authority may,
after consideration of the certification practice statement or the other statement under
sub-section (3) and after making such enquiries as it may deem fit, grant the 48[Electronic
Signature] Certificate or for reasons to be recorded in writing, reject the application:
49[* * *]
50[Provided] that no application shall be rejected unless the applicant has been given a
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed rejection.
36 S. 36. Representations upon issuance of Digital Signature Certificate.—A Certifying
Authority while issuing a Digital Signature Certificate shall certify that—
(a) it has complied with the provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations
made thereunder;
(b) it has published the Digital Signature Certificate or otherwise made it availa- ble to such person relying on it and the subscriber has accepted it;
(c) the subscriber holds the private key corresponding to the public key, listed in
the Digital Signature Certificate;
51[(ca) the subscriber holds a private key which is capable of creating a digital signature
(cb) the public key to be listed in the certificate can be used to verify a digital
signature affixed by the private key held by the subscriber;]
(d) the subscriber’s public key and private key constitute a functioning key pair;
(e) the information contained in the Digital Signature Certificate is accurate; and
(f) it has no knowledge of any material fact, which if it had been included in the
Digital Signature Certificate would adversely affect the reliability of the repre- sentations made in clauses (a) to (d).
37 S. 37. Suspension of Digital Signature Certificate.—(1) Subject to the provisions
of sub-section (2), the Certifying Authority which has issued a Digital Signature Certificate
may suspend such Digital Signature Certificate,—
(a) on receipt of a request to that effect from—
(i) the subscriber listed in the Digital Signature Certificate; or
(ii) any person duly authorised to act on behalf of that subscriber;
(b) if it is of opinion that the Digital Signature Certificate should be suspended
in public interest.
(2) A Digital Signature Certificate shall not be suspended for a period exceeding fifteen
days unless the subscriber has been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter.
(3) On suspension of a Digital Signature Certificate under this section, the Certifying
Authority shall communicate the same to the subscriber.
38 S. 38. Revocation of Digital Signature Certificate.—(1) A Certifying Authority
may revoke a Digital Signature Certificate issued by it—
(a) where the subscriber or any other person authorised by him makes a request
to that effect; or
(b) upon the death of the subscriber; or
(c) upon the dissolution of the firm or winding up of the company where the
subscriber is a firm or a company.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3) and without prejudice to the provisions
of sub-section (1), a Certifying Authority may revoke a Digital Signature Certificate
which has been issued by it at any time, if it is of opinion that—
(a) a material fact represented in the Digital Signature Certificate is false or has
been concealed;
(b) a requirement for issuance of the Digital Signature Certificate was not satis- fied;
(c) the Certifying Authority’s private key or security system was compromised
in a manner materially affecting the Digital Signature Certificate’s reliability;
(d) the subscriber has been declared insolvent or dead or where a subscriber is a
firm or a company, which has been dissolved, wound-up or otherwise
ceased to exist.
(3) A Digital Signature Certificate shall not be revoked unless the subscriber has been
given an opportunity of being heard in the matter.
(4) On revocation of a Digital Signature Certificate under this section, the Certifying
Authority shall communicate the same to the subscriber.
39 S. 39. Notice of suspension or revocation.—(1) Where a Digital Signature Certificate
is suspended or revoked under section 37 or section 38, the Certifying Authority
shall publish a notice of such suspension or revocation, as the case may be, in the repository
specified in the Digital Signature Certificate for publication of such notice.
(2) Where one or more repositories are specified, the Certifying Authority shall publish
notices of such suspension or revocation, as the case may be, in all such repositories.
