CHAPTER 4
ATTRIBUTION, ACKNOWLEDGMENT AND DISPATCH OF
ELECTRONIC RECORDS 11 S. 11. Attribution of electronic records.—An electronic record shall be attributed to
the originator—
(a) if it was sent by the originator himself;
(b) by a person who had the authority to act on behalf of the originator in re- spect of that electronic record; or
(c) by an information system programmed by or on behalf of the originator to
operate automatically.
S. 12. Acknowledgment of Receipt.—(1) Where the originator has not agreed with
the addressee that the acknowledgment of receipt of electronic record be given in a particular
form or by a particular method, an acknowledgment may be given by—
(a) any communication by the addressee, automated or otherwise; or
(b) any conduct of the addressee, sufficient to indicate to the originator that the
electronic record has been received.
(2) Where the originator has stipulated that the electronic record shall be binding only
on receipt of an acknowledgment of such electronic record by him, then unless ac- knowledgment has been so received, the electronic record shall be deemed to have been
never sent by the originator.
(3) Where the originator has not stipulated that the electronic record shall be binding
only on receipt of such acknowledgment, and the acknowledgment has not been re- ceived by the originator within the time specified or agreed or, if no time has been specified
or agreed to within a reasonable time, then the originator may give notice to the
addressee stating that no acknowledgment has been received by him and specifying a
reasonable time by which the acknowledgment must be received by him and if no ac- knowledgment is received within the aforesaid time limit he may after giving notice to
the addressee, treat the electronic record as though it has never been sent.
13 S. 13. Time and place of dispatch and receipt of electronic record.—(1) Save as
otherwise agreed to between the originator and the addressee, the dispatch of an electronic
record occurs when it enters a computer resource outside the control of the originator.
(2) Save as otherwise agreed between the originator and the addressee, the time of re- ceipt of an electronic record shall be determined as follows, namely:—
(a) if the addressee has designated a computer resource for the purpose of re- ceiving electronic records,—
(i) receipt occurs at the time when the electronic record enters the
designated computer resource; or
(ii) if the electronic record is sent to a computer resource of the addressee
that is not the designated computer resource, receipt occurs
at the time when the electronic record is retrieved by the addressee;
(b) if the addressee has not designated a computer resource along with specified
timings, if any, receipt occurs when the electronic record enters the computer
resource of the addressee.
(3) Save as otherwise agreed between the originator and the addressee, an electronic
record is deemed to be dispatched at the place where the originator has his place of
business, and is deemed to be received at the place where the addressee has his place of
business.
(4) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall apply notwithstanding that the place where
the computer resource is located may be different from the place where the electronic
record is deemed to have been received under sub-section (3). (5) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) if the originator or the addressee has more than one place of business, the
principal place of business, shall be the place of business;
(b) if the originator or the addressee does not have a place of business, his usual
place of residence shall be deemed to be the place of business;
(c) “usual place of residence”, in relation to a body corporate, means the place
where it is registered.