CHAPTER 2
16[DIGITAL SIGNATURE AND ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE]
3 S. 3. Authentication of electronic records.—
(1) Subject to the provisions of this section any subscriber may authenticate an electronic record by affixing his digital signature.
(2) The authentication of the electronic record shall be effected by the use of asym- metric crypto system and hash function which envelop and transform the initial electronic
record into another electronic record.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “hash function” means an algo- rithm mapping or translation of one sequence of bits into another, generally smaller, set
known as “hash result” such that an electronic record yields the same hash result every
time the algorithm is executed with the same electronic record as its input making it
computationally infeasible —
(a) To derive or reconstruct the original electronic record from the hash result
produced by the algorithm;
(b) that two electronic records can produce the same hash result using the algo- rithm.
(3) Any person by the use of a public key of the subscriber can verify the electronic
record.
(4) The private key and the public key are unique to the subscriber and constitute a
functioning key pair.
7[S. 3A. Electronic signature.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section
3, but subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), a subscriber may authenticate any
electronic record by such electronic signature or electronic authentication technique
which—
(a) is considered reliable; and
(b) may be specified in the Second Schedule.
(2) For the purpose of this section any electronic signature or electronic authentication
technique shall be considered reliable if—
(a) the signature creation data or the authentication data are, within the context
in which they are used, linked to the signatory or, as the case may be, the authenticator
and to no other person;
(b) the signature creation data or the authentication data were, at the time of
signing , under the control of the signatory or, as the case may be, the authenticator
and of no other person;
(c) any alteration to the electronic signature made after affixing such signature is
detectable;
(d) any alteration to the information made after its authentication by electronic
signature is detectable; and
(e) it fulfils such other conditions which may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government may prescribe the procedure for the purpose of ascertaining
whether electronic signature is that of the person by whom it is purported to
have been affixed or authenticated.
(4) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to or
omit any electronic signature or electronic authentication technique and the procedure
for affixing such signature from the Second Schedule;
Provided that no electronic signature or authentication technique shall be specified in
the Second Schedule unless such signature or technique is reliable.
(5) Every notification issued under sub-section (4) shall be laid before each House of
Parliament.]