CHAPTER 8
DUTIES OF SUBSCRIBERS
40
Information Technology Act, 2000 www.iltb.net/resourses
S. 40. Generating key pair.—Where any Digital Signature Certificate, the public key
of which corresponds to the private key of that subscriber which is to be listed in the
Digital Signature Certificate has been accepted by a subscriber, 52[* *], the subscriber
shall generate 53[that key] pair by applying the security procedure.
54[S. 40A. Duties of subscriber of Electronic Signature Certificate.—In respect of
Electronic Signature Certificate the subscriber shall perform such duties as may be pre- scribed.]
41 S. 41. Acceptance of Digital Signature Certificate.—(1) A subscriber shall be
deemed to have accepted a Digital Signature Certificate if he publishes or authorises the
publication of a Digital Signature Certificate—
(a) to one or more persons;
(b) in a repository, or
otherwise demonstrates his approval of the Digital Signature Certificate in any manner.
(2) By accepting a Digital Signature Certificate the subscriber certifies to all who rea- sonably rely on the information contained in the Digital Signature Certificate that—
(a) the subscriber holds the private key corresponding to the public key listed in
the Digital Signature Certificate and is entitled to hold the same;
(b) all representations made by the subscriber to the Certifying Authority and all
material relevant to the information contained in the Digital Signature Certificate
are true;
(c) all information in the Digital Signature Certificate that is within the
knowledge of the subscriber is true.
42 S. 42. Control of private key.—(1) Every subscriber shall exercise reasonable care to
retain control of the private key corresponding to the public key listed in his Digital Signature
Certificate and take all steps to prevent its disclosure 55[* * * *].
(2) If the private key corresponding to the public key listed in the Digital Signature
Certificate has been compromised, then, the subscriber shall communicate the same
without any delay to the Certifying Authority in such manner as may be specified by the
regulations.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the subscriber shall
be liable till he has informed the Certifying Authority that the private key has been compromised.