CHAPTER 3
ELECTRONIC GOVERNANCE
Chapter III of the Act is one of the most important chapters in the Act. This Chapter
specifies the procedure to be followed for sending and receiving of electronic record and
the time and place of the despatch and receipt. This Chapter contains sections 4 to 10.
4 S. 4. Legal recognition of electronic records.—Where any law provides that in- formation or any other matter shall be in writing or in the typewritten or printed form,
then, not-withstanding anything contained in such law, such requirement shall be
deemed to have been satisfied if such information or matter is—
(a) rendered or made available in an electronic form; and
(b) accessible so as to be usable for a subsequent reference.
5 S. 5. Legal recognition of 18[electronic signatures].—Where any law provides that
information or any other matter shall be authenticated by affixing the signature or any
document should be signed or bear the signature of any person then, notwithstanding
anything contained in such law, such requirement shall be deemed to have been satis- fied, if such information or matter is authenticated by means of 19[electronic signatures]
affixed in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “signed”, with its grammatical variations
and cognate expressions, shall, with reference to a person, mean affixing of his
hand written signature or any mark on any document and the expression “signature”
shall be construed accordingly.
6 S. 6. Use of electronic records and 20[electronic signatures] in Government and
its agencies.—(1) Where any law provides for—
(a) the filing of any form, application or any other document with any office,
authority, body or agency owned or controlled by the appropriate Govern- ment in a particular manner;
(b) the issue or grant of any licence, permit, sanction or approval by whatever
name called in a particular manner;
(c) the receipt or payment of money in a particular manner,
then, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
such requirement shall be deemed to have been satisfied if such filing, issue, grant, re- ceipt or payment, as the case may be, is effected by means of such electronic form as
may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
(2) The appropriate Government may, for the purposes of sub-section (1), by rules,
prescribe—
(a) the manner and format in which such electronic records shall be filed, created
or issued;
(b) the manner or method of payment of any fee or charges for filing, creation
or issue any electronic record under clause (a). 21[S. 6A. Delivery of service by service provider.—(1) The appropriate Govern- ment may, for the purposes of this Chapter and for efficient delivery of services to the
public through electronic means authorise, by order, any service provider to set up,
maintain and upgrade the computerised facilities and perform such other service as it
may specify by notification in the Official Gazette.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, service provider so authorised in- cludes any individual, private agency, private company, partnership firm, sole proprietor
firm or any such other body or agency which has been granted permission by the appropriate
Government to offer services through electronic means in accordance with the
policy governing such service sector.
(2) The appropriate Government may also authorise any service provider authorised
under sub-section (1) to collect, retain and appropriate such service charges, as may be
prescribed by the appropriate Government for the purpose of providing such services,
from the person availing such service.
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the appropriate Government may authorise
the service providers to collect, retain and appropriate service charges under this
section notwithstanding the fact that there is no express provision under the Act, rule,
regulation or notification under which the service is provided to collect, retain and appropriate
e-service charges by the service providers.
(4) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify
the scale of service charges which may be charged and collected by the service providers
under this section :
Provided that the appropriate Government may specify different scale of service charges
for different types of services.]
S. 7. Retention of electronic records.—(1) Where any law provides that documents,
records or information shall be retained for any specific period, then, that requirement
shall be deemed to have been satisfied if such documents, records or information are retained
in the electronic form, if—
(a) the information contained therein remains accessible so as to be usable for a
subsequent reference;
(b) the electronic record is retained in the format in which it was originally gen- erated, sent or received or in a format, which can be demonstrated to repre- sent accurately the information originally generated, sent or received;
(c) the details which will facilitate the identification of the origin, destination,
date and time of dispatch or receipt of such electronic record are available in
the electronic record:
Provided that this clause does not apply to any information which is automatically gen- erated solely for the purpose of enabling an electronic record to be dispatched or re- ceived.
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to any law that expressly provides for the retention
of documents, records or information in the form of electronic records.
2[S. 7A. Audit of documents etc., maintained in electronic form.—Where in any
law for the time being in force, there is a provision for audit of documents, records or in- formation, that provision shall also be applicable for audit of documents, records or in- formation processed and maintained in the electronic form.]
8 S. 8. Publication of rule, regulation, etc., in Electronic Gazette.—Where any law
provides that any rule, regulation, order, bye-law, notification or any other matter shall
be published in the Official Gazette, then, such requirement shall be deemed to have
been satisfied if such rule, regulation, order, bye-law, notification or any other matter is
published in the Official Gazette or Electronic Gazette:
Provided that where any rule, regulation, order, bye-law, notifications or any other matter
is published in the official gazette or Electronic Gazette, the date of publication shall
be deemed to be the date of that Official Gazette which was first published in any form.
9 S. 9. Sections 6, 7 and 8 not to confer right to insist document should be accepted
in electronic form.—Nothing contained in sections 6, 7 and 8 shall confer a
right upon any person to insist that any Ministry or Department of the Central Gov- ernment or the State Government or any authority or body established by or under any
law or controlled or funded by the Central or State Government should accept, issue,
create, retain, preserve any document in the form of electronic records or effect any
monetary transaction in the electronic form.
10 S. 10. Power to make rules by Central Government in respect of 23[electronic
signature].—The Central Government may, for the purposes of this Act, by rules, pre- scribe—
(a) the type of 24[electronic signature];
(b) the manner and format in which the digital signature shall be affixed;
(c) the manner or procedure, which facilitates identification of the person affixing
the 25[electronic signature];
(d) control processes and procedures to ensure adequate integrity, security and
confidentiality of electronic records or payments; and
(e) any other matter which is necessary to give legal effect to 26[electronic signatures].
27[S. 10A. Validity of contracts formed through electronic means.—Where in a
contract formation, the communication of proposals, the acceptance of proposals, the revocation of proposals and acceptances, as the case may be, are expressed in electronic
form or by means of an electronic record, such contract shall not be deemed to be un- enforceable solely on the ground that such electronic form or means was used for that
purpose.]