CHAPTER 13
MISCELLANEOUS 80 S. 80. Power of police officer and other officers to enter, search, etc.—(1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974),
any police officer, not below the rank of a 95[Inspector], or any other officer of the Central
Government or a State Government authorised by the Central Government in this
behalf may enter any public place and search and arrest without warrant any person
found therein who is reasonably suspected or having committed or of committing or of
being about to commit any offence under this Act.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression “public place” in- cludes any public conveyance, any hotel, any shop or any other place intended for use
by, or accessible to the public.
(2) Where any person is arrested under sub-section (1) by an officer other than a police
officer, such officer shall, without unnecessary delay, take or send the person arrested
before a magistrate having jurisdiction in the case or before the officer-in-charge of a
police station.
3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall, subject to the,
provisions of this section, apply, so far as may be, in relation to any entry, search or arrest, made
under this section.
81 S. 81. Act to have overriding effect.—The provisions of this Act shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
96[Provided that nothing contained in this Act shall restrict any person from exercising
any right conferred under the Copyright Act, 14 of 1957 or the Patents Act, 39 of 1970.]
81A 97[S. 81A. Application of the Act to electronic cheque and truncated cheque.—
(1) The provisions of this Act, for the time being in force, shall apply to, or in relation
to, electronic cheques and the truncated cheques subject to such modifications and
amendments as may be necessary for carrying out the purposes of the Negotiable In- struments Act, 1881 (26 of 1881) by the Central Government, in consultation with the
Reserve Bank of India, by notification in the Official Gazette.
(2) Every notification made by the Central Government under sub-section (1) shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or
in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making
any modification in the notification or both Houses agree that the notification should
not be made, the notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that
notification. Explanation.—For the purposes of this Act, the expression “electronic cheque” and
“truncated cheque” shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in section 6 of the
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (26 of 1881)].
82 S. 82. 1[Chairperson, Members, Officers and employees to be public serv- ants].—The 2
[Chairperson, Members] and other officers and employees of a Cyber Appellate
Tribunal, the Controller, the Deputy Controller and the Assistant Controllers
shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian
Penal Code 45 of 1860.
Power to give directions—Sec. 83 83 S. 83. Power to give directions.—The Central Government may give directions to
any State Government as to the carrying into execution in the State of any of the provisions
of this Act or of any rule, regulation or order made thereunder.
S. 84. Protection of action taken in good faith.—No suit, prosecution or other le- gal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government, the State Government, the
Controller or any person acting on behalf of him, the Presiding Officer, adjudicating
officers and the staff of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal for anything which is in good faith
done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule, regulation or order
made thereunder.
3[S. 84A. Modes or methods for encryption.—The Central Government may, for
secure use of the electronic medium and for promotion of e-governance and e- commerce, prescribe the modes or methods for encryption.
S. 84B. Punishment for abetment of offence.—Whoever abets any offence shall, if
the act abetted is committed in consequence of the abetment, and no express provision
is made by this Act for the punishment of such abetment, be punished with the punishment
provided for the offence under this Act.
Explanation.—An act or offence is said to be committed in consequence of abetment,
when it is committed in consequence of the instigation, or in pursuance of the conspira- cy, or with the aid which constitutes the abetment.
S. 84C. Punishment for abetment to commit offence.—Whoever attempts to
commit an offence punishable by this Act or causes such an offence to be committed,
and in such an attempt does any act towards the commission of the offence, shall, where no express provision is made for the punishment of such attempt, be punished with
imprisonment of any description provided for the offence, for a term which may extend
to one-half of the longest term of imprisonment provided for the offence, or with such
fine as is provided for the offence, or with both.]
S. 85. Offences by companies.—(1) Where a person committing a contravention of
any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder is a
company, every person who, at the time the contravention was committed, was in
charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of business of the com- pany as well as the company, shall be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable
to punishment if he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge or
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent such contravention.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where a contravention of any
of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder has been
committed by a company and it is proved that the contravention has taken place with the
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director,
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or
other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation,—For the purposes of this section,—
(i) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(ii) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
86 S. 86. Removal of difficulties.—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official
Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear
to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of
two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
87 S. 87. Power of Central Government to make rules.—(1) The Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, and in the Electronic Gazette make rules to
carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
4
[(a) the conditions for considering reliability of electronic signature or electronic
authentication technique under sub-section (2) of section 3A;
(aa) the procedure for ascertaining electronic signature or authentication under
sub-section (3) of section 3A;
(ab) the manner in which any information or matter may be authenticated by
means of electronic signature under section 5;]
(b) the electronic form in which filing, issue, grant or payment shall be effected
under sub-section (1) of section 6;
(c) the manner and format in which electronic records shall be filed, created or
issued and the method of payment under sub-section (2) of section 6;
5
[(ca) the manner in which the authorised service provider may collect, retain and
appropriate service charges under sub-section (2) of section 6A;]
(d) the matters relating to the type of 6
[electronic signature], manner and format
in which it may be affixed under section 10; 7
[(e) the manner of storing and affixing electronic signature creation data under section
15;
(ea) the security procedures and practice under section 16;]
(f) the qualifications, experience and terms and conditions of service of Controller,
Deputy Controllers 8
[Assistant Controllers, other Officers and em- ployees] under section 17;
(g) 9
[* * *]
(h) the requirements which an applicant must fulfil under sub-section (2) of
section 21;
(i) the period of validity of licence granted under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of
section 21;
(j) the form in which an application for licence may be made under sub-section
(1) of section 22;
(k) the amount of fees payable under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 22;
(l) such other documents which shall accompany an application for licence under
clause (d) of sub-section (2) of section 22;
(m) the form and the fee for renewal of a licence and the fee payable thereof under section 23;
0[(ma) the form of application and fee for issue of Electronic Signature Certificate
under Section 35;]
(n) the form in which application for issue of a 11[Electronic Signature] Certificate
may be made under sub-section (1) of section 35;
(o) the fee to be paid to the Certifying Authority for issue of a Digital Signature Certificate
under sub-section (2) of section 35; 12[(oa) the duties of subscriber under section 40A;
(ob) the reasonable security practices and procedures and sensitive personal data or
information under section 43A;]
(p) the manner in which the adjudicating officer shall hold inquiry under sub- section (1) of section 46;
(q) the qualification and experience which the adjudicating officer shall possess under sub-section (2) of section 46;
(r) the salary, allowances and the other terms and conditions of service of the
13[Chairperson and Members] under section 52;
(s) the procedure for investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of the 14[Chairperson
and Members] under sub-section (3) of section 54;
(t) the salary and allowances and other conditions, of service of other officers
and employees under sub-section (3) of section 56;
(u) the form in which appeal may be filed and the fee thereof under sub-section
(3) of section 57;
(v) any other power of a civil court required to be prescribed under clause (g) of
sub-section (2) of section 58; and
15[(w) the powers and functions of the Chariperson of the Cyber Appellate Tribu- nal under section 52A;
(x) the information, duration, manner and form of such information to be retained
and preserved under section 67C;
(y) the procedures and safeguards for interception, monitoring, or decryption
under sub-section (2) of section 69;
(z) the procedure and safeguards for blocking for access by the public under
sub-section (2) of section 69A;
(za) the procedure and safeguards for monitoring and collecting traffic data or
information under sub-section (3) of section 69B;
(zb) the information security practices and porcedures for protected system un- der section 70;
(zc) manner of performing functions and duties of the agency under sub-section
(3) of section 70A;
(zd) the officers and employees under sub-section (2) of section 70B;
(ze) salaries and allowances and terms and conditions of service of the Director
General and other officers and employees under sub-section (3) of section
70B;
(zf) the manner in which the functions and duties of agency shall be performed
under sub-section (5) of section 70B;
(zg) the guidelines to be observed by the intermediaries under sub-section (2) of
section 79;
(zh) the modes or methods for encryption under section 84a;]
(3) 16[Every notification made by the Central Government under clause (f) of sub- section (4) of section 1 and every rule made by it] shall be laid, as soon as may be after it
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive ses- sions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in 17[* * *]
or the rule or both Houses agree that 18[* * *] or the rule should not be made, the notification
or the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that 19[* * *] rule.
88 S. 88. Constitution of Advisory Committee.—(1) The Central Government shall, as
soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, constitute a Committee called the
Cyber Regulations Advisory Committee.
(2) The Cyber Regulations Advisory Committee shall consist of a Chairperson and
such number of other official and non-official members representing the interests prin- cipally affected or having special knowledge of the subject-matter as the Central Gov- ernment may deem fit.
(3) The Cyber Regulations Advisory Committee shall advise—
(a) the Central Government either generally as regards any rules or for any other
purpose connected with this Act;
(b) the Controller in framing the regulations under this Act.
(4) There shall be paid to the non-official members of such Committee such travelling
and other allowances as the Central Government may fix.
89 S. 89. Power of Controller to make regulations.—(1) The Controller may, after
consultation with the Cyber Regulations Advisory Committee and with the previous
approval of the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations
consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes
of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the particulars relating to maintenance of data-base containing the disclosure
record of every Certifying Authority under clause 20[(n)] of section 18;
(b) the conditions and restrictions subject to which the Controller may recognise
any foreign Certifying Authority under sub-section (1) of section 19;
(c) the terms and conditions subject to which a licence may be granted under
clause (c) of sub-section (3) of section 21;
(d) other standards to be observed by a Certifying Authority under clause (d) of
section 30;
(e) the manner in which the Certifying Authority shall disclose the matters specified
in sub-section (1) of section 34;
(f) the particulars of statement which shall accompany an application under
sub-section (3) of section 35.
(g) the manner in which the subscriber shall communicate the compromise of
private key to the certifying authority under sub-sections (2) of section 42.
(3) Every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the regulation or
both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, how- ever, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that regulation.
90 S. 90. Power of state Government to make rules.—(1) The State Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the electronic form in which filing, issue, grant receipt or payment shall be
effected under sub-section (1) of section 6;
(b) for matters specified in sub-section (2) of section 6;
(c) 21[* * *]
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists
of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House.