CHAPTER 11
OFFENCES 65 S. 65. Tampering with computer source documents.—Whoever knowingly or intentionally
conceals, destroys or alters or intentionally or knowingly causes another to
conceal, destroy or alter any computer source code used for a computer, computer pro- gramme, computer system or computer network, when the computer source code is
required to be kept or maintained by law for the time being in force, shall be punishable
with imprisonment up to three years, or with fine which may extend up to two lakh ru- pees, or with both.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “computer source code” means the
listing of programmes, computer Commands, design and layout and programme analysis
of computer resource in any form.
66 80[S. 66. Computer related offences.—If any person, dishonestly or fraudulently,
does any act referred to in section 43, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees
or with both.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section,—
(a) the word “dishonesty” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 24 of
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
(b) the word “fraudulently” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 25
of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
S. 66A. Punishment for sending offensive messages through communication
service, etc.—Any person who sends, by means of a computer resource or a communication
device,—
(a) any information that is grossly offensive or has meaning character, or
(b) any information which he knows to be false, but for the purpose of causing
annoyance, inconvenience, danger, obstruction, insult, injury, criminal intimidation, enmity, hatred or ill will, persistently by making use of such computer
resource or a communication device; or
(c) any electronic mail or electronic mail massage for the purpose of causing
annoyance or inconvenience or to deceive or to mislead the addressee or re- cipient about the origin of such massage,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and
with fine.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, terms “electronic mail” and “electronic
mail message” means a message or information created to transmitted or received on
a computer, computer system, computer resource or communication device including
attachments in text, image, audio, video and any other electronic record, which may be
transmitted with the message.
S. 66B. Punishment for dishonestly receiving stolen computer resource or
communication device.—Whoever dishonestly receives or retains any stolen computer
resource or communication device knowing or having reason to believe the same to
be stolen computer resource or communication device, shall be punished with impris- onment of either description for a term which may extend to three years or with fine
which may extend to rupees one lakh or with both.
S. 66C. Punishment for identity theft.—Whoever, fraudulently or dishonestly make
use of the electronic signature, password or any other unique identification feature of
any other person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to
rupees one lakh.
S. 66D. Punishment for cheating by personation by using computer resource.—Whoever,
by means of any communication device or computer resource
cheats by personation, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend
to one lakh rupees.
S. 66E. Punishment for violation of privacy.—Whosoever, intentionally or knowingly
captures, publishes or transmits the image of a private area of any person without
his or her consent, under circumstances violating the privacy of that person, shall be
punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years or with fine not exceeding
two lakh rupees, or with both.
Explanation.—Fro the purposes of this section—
(a) “transmit” means to electronically send a visual image with the internet that
it be viewed by a person or persons;
(b) “capture”, with respect to an image, means to videotape, photograph, film
or record by any means;
(c) “private area” means the naked or undergarment clad genitals, public area,
buttocks or female breast;
(d) “publishes” means reproduction in the printed or electronic form and making
it available for public;
(e) “under circumstances violating privacy” means circumstances in which a
person can have a reasonable expectation that—
(i) he or she could disrobe in privacy, without being concerned that an
image of his private area was being captured; or
(ii) any part of his or her private area would not be visible to the public
regardless of whether that person is in a public or private place.
S. 66F. Punishment for cyber terrorism.—(1) Whosoever,—
(A) with intent to threaten the unity, integrity, security or sovereignty of India or
to strike terror in the people or any section of the people by—
(i) denying or cause the denial of access to any person authorised to
access computer resource; or
(ii) attempting to penetrate or access a computer resource without authorisation
or exceeding authorised access; or
(iii) introducing or causing to introduce any computer contaminant,
and by means of such conduct causes or is likely to cause death or injuries to
persons or damage to or destruction of property or disputes or knowing that
it is likely to cause damage or disruption of supplies or services essential to
the life of the community or adversely affect the critical information infra- structure specified under section 70; or
(B) knowingly or intentionally penetrates or accesses a computer resource without
authorisation or exceeding authorised access, and by means of such
conduct obtains access to information, data or computer database that is re- stricted for reasons of the security of the state or foreign relations; or any re- stricted information, data or computer database, with reasons to believe that
such information, data or computer database so obtained may be used to
cause or likely to cause injury to the interests of the sovereignty and integrity
of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public
order, decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of court, defamation
or incitement to an offence, or to the advantage of any foreign nation,
group of individuals or otherwise,
commits the offence of cyber terrorism.
(2) whoever commits or conspires to commit cyber terrorism shall be punishable with
imprisonment which may extend to imprisonment for life.
67 S. 67. Punishment for publishing or transmitting obscene material in electronic
form.—Whoever publishes or transmits or causes to be published or transmitted in the
electronic form, any material which is lascivious or appeals to the prurient interest or if
its effect is such as to tend to deprave and corrupt persons who are likely, having regard
to all relevant circumstances, to read, see or hear the matter contained or embodied in it,
shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years and with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees and
in the event of a second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to five years and also with fine which may extend to
ten lakh rupees.
S. 67A. Punishment for publishing or transmitting of material containing sex- ually explicit act, etc., in electronic form.—Whoever publishes or transmits or causes
to be published or transmitted in the electronic form any material which contains sexually
explicit act or conduct shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to five years and with fine which may
extend to ten lakh rupees and in the event of second or subsequent conviction with im- prisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years and also
with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
S. 67B. Punishment for publishing or transmitting of material depicting children
in sexually explicit act, etc., in electronic form.—Whoever—
(a) publishes or transmits or causes to be published or transmitted material in
any electronic form which depicts children engaged in sexually explicit act or
conduct; or
(b) creates text or digital images, collects, seeks, browses, downloads, advertises,
promotes, exchanges or distributes material in any electronic form depicting
children in obscene or indecent or sexually explicit manner; or
(c) cultivates, entices or induces children to online relationship which one or
more children for and on sexually explicit act or in a manner that may offend
a reasonable adult on the computer resource; or
(d) facilitates abusing children online; or
(e) records in any electronic form own abuse or that of others pertaining to
sexually explicit act with children,
shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to five year and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees and in
the event of second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to seven years and also with fine which may extend to ten
lakh rupees;
Provided that provisions of section 67, section 67A and this section does not extend to
any book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting representation or figure in electronic
form—
(i) the publication of which is proved to be justified as being for the public
good on the ground that such book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing,
painting representation or figure is in the interest of science, literature, art or
learning or other objects of general concern; or
(ii) which is kept or used for bona fide heritage or religious purpose.
Explanation—For the purpose of this section, “children” means a person who has not
completed the age of 18 years.
S. 67C. Preservation and retention of information by intermediaries.—(1) Intermediary
shall preserve and retain such information as may be specified for such duration
and in such manner and format as the Central Government may prescribed.
(2) Any intermediary who intentionally or knowingly contravenes the provisions of
sub-section (1) shall be punished with an imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three years and shall also be liable to fine.
S. 68. Power of the Controller to give directions.—(1) The Controller may, by order,
direct a Certifying Authority or any employee of such Authority to take such
measures or cease carrying on such activities as specified in the order if those are neces- sary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Act, rules or any regulations made
thereunder.
81[(2) Any person who intentionally or knowingly fails to comply with any order under
sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to impris- onment for a term not exceeding two years or a fine not exceeding one lakh rupees or
with both.]
69 82[S. 69. Power to issue directions for interception or monitoring or decryption
of any information through any computer resource.—(1) Where the Central Gov- ernment or a State Government or any of its officers specially authorised by the Central
Government or the State Government, as the case may be, in this behalf may, if satisfied
that it is necessary or expedient so to do, in the interest of the sovereignty or integrity of
India, defence of India, security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States or
public order or for preventing incitement to the commission of any cognizable offence
relating to above or for investigation of any offence, it may subject to the provisions of
sub-section (2), for reasons to be recorded in writing by order, direct any agency of the
appropriate Government to intercept, monitor or decrypt or cause to be intercepted or
monitored or decrypted any information generated, transmitted, received or stored in
any computer resource.
(2) The procedure and safeguards subject to which such interception or monitoring or
decryption may be carried out, shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The subscriber or intermediary or any person in-charge of the computer resource
shall, when called upon by any agency referred to in sub-section (1) extend all facilities
and technical assistance to—
(a) provide access to or secure access to the computer resource generating
transmitting, receiving or storing such information; or
(b) intercept, monitor, or decrypt the information, as the case may be; or
(c) provide information stored in computer resource.
(4) The subscriber or intermediary or any person who fails to assist the agency re- ferred to in sub-section (3) shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine.
S. 69A. Power to issue directions for blocking public access of any information
through any computer resource.—(1) Where the Central Government or any of its
officers specially authorised by it in this behalf is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient
so to do, in the interest of sovereignty and integrity of India, defence of India, secu- rity of the State, friendly relations with foreign States or public order or for preventing
incitement to the commission of any cognizable offence relating to above, it may subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), for reasons to be recorded in writing by order, direct
any agency of the Government or intermediary to block for access by the public any
information generated, transmitted, received or stored in any computer resource.
(2) The procedure and safeguards subject to which such blocking for access by the
public may be carried out, shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The intermediary who fails to comply with the direction issued under sub-section
(1) shall be punished with an imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years
and shall also be liable to fine.
S. 69B. Power to authorise to monitor and collect traffic data or information
through any computer resource for cyber security.—(1) The Central Government
may, to enhance cyber security and for identification analysis and prevention of intru- sion or spread of computer containment in the country, by notification in the Official
Gazette, authorise any agency of the Government to monitor and collect traffic data or
information generated, transmitted, received or stored in any computer resource.
(2) The intermediary or any person in-charge or the computer resource shall, when
called upon by the agency which has been authorised under sub-section (1), provide
technical assistance and extend all facilities to such agency to enable online access or to
secure and provide online access to the computer resource generating, transmitting, re- ceiving or storing such traffic data or information.
(3) The procedure and safeguards for monitoring and collecting traffic data or information,
shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) Any intermediary who intentionally or knowingly contravenes the provisions of
sub-section (2) shall be punished with an imprisonment for a term which any extend to
three years and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section,—
(i) “computer contaminant” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 43;
(ii) “traffic data” means any data identifying or purporting to identify any per- son, computer system or computer network or location to or from which
the communication is or may be transmitted and includes communications
origin, destination, route, time, date, size, duration or type of underlying service
and any other information.]
70 S. 70. Protected system.—83[(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, declare that any computer resource which directly or indirectly
affects the facility of Critical Information Infrastructure, to be a protected system.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “Critical Information Infrastructure”
means the computer resource, the incapacitation or destruction of which, shall have
debilitating impact on national security, economy, public health or safety.]
(2) The appropriate Government may, by order in writing, authorise the persons who
are authorised to access protected systems notified under sub-section (1).
(3) Any person who secures access or attempts to secure access to a protected system
in contravention of the provisions of this section shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to
fine.
84[(4) The Central Government shall prescribe the information security practices and
procedures for such protected system.]
S. 70A. National nodal agency.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification
published in the Official Gazette, designate any organisation of the Government as the
national nodal agency in respect of Critical Information Infrastructure Protection.
(2) The national nodal agency designated under sub-section (1) shall be responsible
for all measures including Research and Development relating to protection of Critical
Information Infrastructure.
(3) The manner of performing functions and duties of the agency referred to in sub- section (1) shall be such as may be prescribed.
85[S. 70B. Indian Computer Emergency Response Team to serve as national
agency for incident response.—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint an agency of the Government to be called the Indian
Computer Emergency Response Team.
(2) The Central Government shall provide the agency referred to in sub-section (1)
with a Director-General and such other officers and employees as may be prescribed .
(3) The salary and allowances and terms and conditions of the Director-General and
other officers and employees shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Indian Computer Emergency Response Team shall serve as the national agen- cy for performing the following functions in the area of cyber security.—
(a) collection, analysis and dissemination of information on cyber incidents;
(b) forecast and alerts of cyber security incidents;
(c) emergency measures for handling cyber security incidents;
(d) coordination of cyber incidents response activities;
(e) issue guidelines, advisors, vulnerability notes and whitepapers relating to
information security practices, procedures, prevention, response and reporting
of cyber incidents;
(f) such other functions relating to cyber security as may be prescribed.
(5) The manner of performing functions and duties of the agency referred to in sub- section (1) shall be such as may be prescribed.
(6) For carrying out the provisions of sub-section (4), the agency referred to in sub- section (1) may call for information and give direction to the service providers, interme- diaries, data centers, body corporate and any other person.
(7) Any service provider intermediaries, data centers, body corporate or person who
fails to provide the information called for the comply with the direction under sub- section (6), shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may be extend to
one year with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both.
(8) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this section, except on a
complaint made by an officer authorised in this behalf by the agency referred to in sub- section (1).]
71 S. 71. Penalty for misrepresentation.—Whoever makes any misrepresentation to, or
suppresses any material fact from, the Controller or the Certifying Authority for obtaining
any licence or
86[Electronic Signature] Certificate, as the case may be, shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which
may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
72 S. 72. Penalty for breach of confidentiality and privacy.—Save as otherwise pro- vided in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, any person who, in pursu- ant of any of the powers conferred under this Act, rules or regulations made thereunder,
has secured access to any electronic record, book, register, correspondence, information,
document or other material without the consent of the person concerned discloses such
electronic record, book, register, correspondence, information, document or other mate- rial to any other person shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to two years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
87[S. 72A. Punishment for disclosure of information in breach of lawful contract.—Save
as otherwise provided in this Act or any other law for the time being in
force, any person including and intermediary who, while providing services under the
terms of lawful contract, has secured access to any material containing personal infor- mation about another person, with the intent to cause or knowing that he is likely to
cause wrongful loss or wrongful gain discloses, without the consent of the person con- cerned, or in breach of a lawful contract, such material to any other person, shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine
which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.]
73 S. 73. Penalty for publishing 88[Electronic Signature] Certificate false in certain
particulars.—(1) No person shall publish a 89[Electronic Signature] Certificate or otherwise
make it available to any other person with the knowledge that—
(a) the Certifying Authority listed in the certificate has not issued it; or
(b) the subscriber listed in the certificate has not accepted it; or
(c) the certificate has been revoked or suspended,
unless such publication is for the purpose of verifying a 90[electronic signature] created
prior to such suspension or revocation.
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to
one lakh rupees, or with both.
74 S. 74. Publication for fraudulent purpose.—Whoever knowingly creates, publishes
or otherwise makes available a 91[Electronic Signature] Certificate for any fraudulent or
unlawful purpose shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
two years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
75 S. 75. Act to apply for offences or contravention committed outside India.—(1)
Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the provisions of this Act shall apply also to
any offence or contravention committed outside India by any person irrespective of his
nationality.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), this Act shall apply to an offence or contra- vention committed outside India by any person if the act or conduct constituting the
offence or contravention involves a computer, computer system or computer network
located in India.
76 S. 76. Confiscation.—Any computer, computer system, floppies, compact disks, tape
drives or any other accessories related thereto, in respect of which any provision of this
Act, rules, orders or regulations made thereunder has been or is being contravened, shall
be liable to confiscation:
Provided that where it is established to the satisfaction of the court adjudicating the
confiscation that the person in whose possession, power or control of any such computer,
computer system, floppies, compact disks, tape drives or any other accessories relating
thereto is found is not responsible for the contravention of the provisions of this
Act, rules, orders or regulations made thereunder, the court may, instead of making an
order for confiscation of such computer, computer system, floppies, compact disks, tape
drives or any other accessories related thereto, make such other order authorised by this
Act against the person contravening of the provisions of this Act, rules, orders or regulations
made thereunder as it may think fit.
92[S. 77. Compensation penalties or confiscation not to interfere with other
punishment.—No compensation awarded, penalty imposed or confiscation made un- der this Act shall prevent the award of compensation or imposition of any other penalty
or punishment under any other law for the time being in force.
S. 77A. Compounding of offences.—(1) A court of competent jurisdiction may
compound offences, other than offences for which the punishment for life or impris- onment for a term exceeding three years has been provided, under this Act:
Provided that the court shall not compound such offences where the accused is, by rea- son of his previous conviction, liable to either enhance punishment or to a punishment
of a different kind:
Provided further that the court shall not compound any offence where such offence affects
the socio economic conditions of the country or has been committed against a
child below the age of 18 years or a woman.
(2) The person accused of an offence under this Act may file an application for com- pounding in the court in which offence is pending for trial and the provisions of section
265B and 265C of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall apply.
S. 77B. Offences with three years imprisonment to be bailable.— Notwithstanding
anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the offence
punishable with imprisonment of three years and above shall be cognizable and the offence
punishable with imprisonment of three years shall be bailable.]
7778 S. 78. Power to investigate offences.—Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), a police officer not below the rank of
93[Inspector] shall investigate any offence under this Act.
