CHAPTER 10
THE CYBER 66 48 [*] APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
S. 48. Establishment of Cyber Appellate Tribunal.—(1) The Central Government
shall, by notification, establish one or more appellate tribunals to be known as the Cyber
67[*] Appellate Tribunal.
(2) The Central Government shall also specify, in the notification referred to in sub- section (1), the matters and places in relation to which the Cyber Appellate Tribunal may
exercise jurisdiction.
49 68[S. 49. Composition of Cyber Appellate Tribunal.—(1) The Cyber Appellate
Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson and such number of other Members, as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that the person appointed as the Presiding Officer of the Cyber Appellate
Tribunal under the provisions of this Act immediately before the commencement of the
Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008 shall be deemed to have been appointed
as the Chairperson of the said Cyber Appellate Tribunal under the provisions of
this Act as amended by the Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008.
(2) The selection of Chairperson and Members of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall
be made by the Central Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of India.
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act—
(a) the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal may
be exercise by the Branches thereof;
(b) a Bench may be constituted by the Chairperson of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal
with one or two Members of such Tribunal as the Chairperson may
deem fit;
(c) the Benches of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall sit at New Delhi and at
such other places as the Central Government may, in consultation with the
Chairperson of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify;
(d) the Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify
the areas in relation to which each Bench of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal
may exercise its jurisdiction.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), the Chairperson of the
Cyber Appellate Tribunal may transfer a Member of such Tribunal from one Bench to
another Bench.
(5) If at any stage of the hearing of any case or matter it appears to the Chairperson or
a Member of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal that the case or matter is of such a nature
that it ought to be heard by a Bench consisting of more Members, the case or matter
may be transferred by the Chairperson to such Bench as the Chairperson may deem fit.
50 S. 50. Qualifications for appointment as Chairperson and Members of Cyber
Appellate Tribunal.—(1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Chair
person of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal unless he is, or has been, or is qualified to be, a
Judge of a High Court.
(2) The Members of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal, except the Judicial Member to be
appointed under sub-section (3), shall be appointed by the Central Government from
amongst persons, having special knowledge of , and professional experience in, infor- mation technology, telecommunication, industry, management or consumer affairs:
Provided that a person shall not be appointed as a Member, unless he is, or has been, in
the service of the Central Government or a State Government, as has held the post of
Additional Secretary to the Government of India or any equivalent post in the Central
Government or State Government for a period of not less than one year or Joint Secretary
to the Government of India or any equivalent post in the Central Government or
State Government for a period of not less than seven years.
(3) The Judicial Members of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall be appointed by the
Central Government from amongst persons who is or has been an member of the Indian
Legal Service and has held the post of Additional Secretary for a period of not less
than one year or Grade I post of that Service for a period of not less than five years.
51 S. 51. Term of office, conditions of service, etc., of Chairperson and Members.—(1)
The Chairperson or Member of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall hold office
for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he
attains the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier.
(2) Before appointing any person as the Chairperson or Member of the Cyber Appellate
Tribunal, the Central Government shall satisfy itself that the person does not have
any such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as such
Chairperson or Member.
(3) An officer of the Central Government or State Government on his selection as the
Chairperson or Member of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, shall have
to retire from service before joining as such Chairperson or Member.
S. 52. Salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson
and Members.—The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and
conditions of service including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits of, the
Chairperson or a Member of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall be such as may be pre- scribed.
S. 52A. Powers of superintendence, direction, etc.—The Chairperson of the
Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall have powers of general superintendence and directions in
the conduct of the affairs of that Tribunal and he shall, in addition to presiding over the
meetings of the Tribunal, exercise and discharge such powers and functions of the Tribunal
as may be prescribed.
S. 52B. Distribution of business among Benches.—Where Benches are constituted,
the Chairperson of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal may, by order, distribute the business
of that Tribunal amongst the Benches and also the matters to be dealt with the each
Bench.
S. 52C. Power of Chairperson to transfer cases.—On the application of any of the
parties and after notice to the parties, and after hearing such of them as he may deem
proper to be heard, or suo motu without such notice, the Chairperson of the Cyber Appellate
Tribunal may transfer any case pending before one Bench, for disposal to any
other Bench.
S. 52D. Decision by majority.—If the Members of a Bench consisting of two
Members differ in opinion on any point, they shall state the point or points on which
they differ, and make a reference to the Chairperson of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal
who shall hear the point or points himself and such point or points shall be decided ac- cording to the opinion of the majority of the Members who have heard the case, including
those who first heard it.]
S. 53. Filling up of vacancies.—If, for reason other than temporary absence, any
vacancy occurs in the office of the 69[Chairperson or Member as the case may be] Pre- siding Officer of a Cyber Appellate Tribunal, then the Central Government shall appoint
another person in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill the vacancy
and the proceedings may be continued before the Cyber Appellate Tribunal from the
stage at which the vacancy is filled.
54 S. 54. Resignation and removal.—(1) The 70[Chairperson or the member] of a
Cyber Appellate Tribunal may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the
Central Government, resign his office:
Provided that the said 71[Chairperson or the member] shall, unless he is permitted by
the Central Government to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office until the
expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly
appointed as his successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of his term of office,
whichever is the earliest.
(2) The 72[Chairperson or the member] of a Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall not be re- moved from his office except by an order by the Central Government on the ground of
proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry made by a Judge of the Supreme
Court in which the Presiding Officer concerned has been informed of the charges
against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of these charg- es.(3) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure for the investigation of
misbehaviour or incapacity of the aforesaid 73[Chairperson or the member].
55 S. 55. Orders constituting Appellate Tribunal to be final and not to invalidate
its proceedings.—No order of the Central Government appointing any person as the
74[Chairperson or the member] of a Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall be called in question
in any manner and no act or proceeding before a Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall be
called in question in any manner on the ground merely of any defect in the constitution
of a Cyber Appellate Tribunal.
56 S. 56. Staff of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal.—(1) The Central Government shall
provide the Cyber Appellate Tribunal with such officers and employees as that Gov- ernment may think fit.
(2) The officers and employees of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall discharge their
functions under general superintendence of the 75[Chairperson].
(3) The salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the officers and
employees of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
57 S. 57. Appeal to Cyber Appellate Tribunal.—(1) Save as provided in sub-section
(2), any person aggrieved by an order made by an adjudicating officer under this Act
may prefer an appeal to a Cyber Tribunal having jurisdiction in the matter.
(2) No appeal shall lie to the Cyber Appellate Tribunal from an order made by an adjudicating
officer with the consent of the parties.
(3) Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall be filed within a period of forty-five days
from the date on which a copy of the order made by the controller or the adjudicating
officer is received by the person aggrieved and it shall be in such form and be accompa- nied by such fee as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Cyber Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry of
the said period of forty-five days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not
filing it within that period.
(4) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (1), the Cyber Appellate Tribunal may,
after giving the parties to the appeal, an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders
thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying or setting aside the order appealed against.
(5) The Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the
parties to the appeal and to the concerned controller or adjudicating officer.
(6) The appeal filed before the Cyber Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (1) shall be
dealt with by it as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose
of the appeal finally within six months from the date of receipt of the appeal.
58 S. 58. Procedure and powers of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal.—(1) The Cyber
Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down by the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and,
subject to the other provisions of this Act and of any rules, the Cyber Appellate Tribu- nal shall have powers to regulate its own procedure including the place at which it shall
have its sittings.
(2) The Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions
under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him
on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents or other electronic
records;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;
(e) reviewing its decisions;
(f) dismissing an application for default or deciding it ex parte;
(g) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(3) Every proceeding before the Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a ju- dicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of
section 196 of the Indian Penal Code and the Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed
to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).
59 S. 59. Right to legal representation.—The appellant may either appear in person or
authorise one or more legal practitioners or any of its officers to present his or its case
before the Cyber Appellate Tribunal.
60 S. 60. Limitation.—The provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963) , shall,
as far as may be, apply to an appeal made to the Cyber Appellate Tribunal.
61 S. 61. Civil court not to have jurisdiction.—No court shall have jurisdiction to entertain
any suit or proceeding in respect of any matter which an adjudicating officer appointed
under this Act or the Cyber Appellate Tribunal constituted under this Act is
empowered by or under this Act to determine and no injunction shall be granted by any
court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any
power conferred by or under this Act.
62 S. 62. Appeal to High court.—Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of
the Cyber Appellate Tribunal may file an appeal to the High Court within sixty days
from the date of communication of the decision or order of the Cyber Appellate
Tribunal to him on any question of fact or law arising out of such order:
Provided that the High Court may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by
sufficient cause from filing the appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed within a
further period not exceeding sixty days.
63 S. 63. Compounding of contraventions.—(1) Any contravention under this 76[Act]
may, either before or after the institution of adjudication proceedings, be compounded by
the Controller or such other officer as may be specially authorised by him in this behalf or by
the adjudicating officer, as the case may be, subject to such conditions as the Controller or
such other officer or the adjudicating officer may specify:
Provided that such sum shall not, in any case, exceed the maximum amount of the pen- alty which may be imposed under this Act for the contravention so compounded.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to a person who commits the same or similar
contravention within a period of three years from the date on which the first contra- vention, committed by him, was compounded.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, any second or subsequent contra- vention committed after the expiry of a period of three years from the date on which the
contravention was previously compounded shall be deemed to be a first contravention.
(3) Where any contravention has been compounded under sub-section (1), no pro- ceeding or further proceeding, as the case may be, shall be taken against the person
guilty of such contravention in respect of the contravention so compounded.
64 S. 64. Recovery of 77[penalty or compensation].—A 78[penalty imposed or com- pensation awarded] under this Act, if it is not paid, shall be recovered as an arrear of
land revenue and the licence or the 79[Electronic Signature] Certificate, as the case may
be, shall be suspended till the penalty is paid.